# Financial Statement Analysis

Financial statements are accounting reports with past performance information issued by firms.

US companies are required to file with the SEC every quarter on 10-Q and annually on 10-K

There must also be an annual report to shareholders.

## Preparation of Financial Statements

Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) is the guideline for public companies.

Corporations are also required to hire an auditor to ensure that the financial statements are reliable.

## The Balance Sheet

The balance sheet is the statement of financial position listing assets and liabilities.

The Difference between a firm's assets and liabilities is the **Stockholder's Equity**, also called the book value of equity.

Assets = Liabilities + Stockholder's Equity

### Assets

**current assets** are either cash or assets that could be converted into cash within one year.

- cash and other marketable securities. Low risk, short term investments that can be easily sold and converted to cash. (short term bonds)
- Accounts Receivable
- Inventories
- Other current assets, such as prepaid expenses.

**long term assets** are those that cannot be quickly converted to cash, and includes things like buildings, machinery,and equipment.

**depreciation expense** is the reduction in value recorded each year over the lifetime of an asset.

The **book value** of an asset is it's acquisitions cost - depreciation

The difference between a price paid for a company and its **tangible assets** are considered **goodwill** and **intangible assets**

The depreciation of intangible assets is called **amortization** or **impairment charge**

### Liabilities

**current liabilities** are those that will be satisfied within one year.

- accounts payable
- short term debt
- salary or taxes that are owed but not paid.

**net working capital** = current assets - current liabilities

**long term liabilities** extend beyond one year

- long term debt
- capital leases
  - contract entitling the renter to the temporary use of an asset.
- deferred taxes

### Stockholder's equity

**book value of equity** = assets - liabilities

The number is likely not a true assessment of the firms value as the asset values are based on historic values rather than evaluated at the current time. additionally, there are many assets that are not captured such as expertise, reputation and relationships.

### Market Value vs Book Value

Market Value of Equity = Shares outstanding x Market price per share

Market value is often referred to as **market capitalization**. It shows how investors expect those assets to produce in the future.

Market-To-Book Ratio indicates the relationship between market capitalization and the book value of stockholder's equity. also called **P/B ratio**

PB ratio = Market Value of Equity / Book Value of Equity

Low PB ratios are often labeled **value stocks** while high market to book rations are considered **growth stocks**. It indicates how much the market thinks a company is worth in relation to it's book value.

**total enterprise value(TEV)** assess the value of the underlying business assets without debt and separate from any cash and marketable securities. Also the "cost to take over the business": buy all equity, pay off debt, and adjust for cash.

Enterprise Value = Market Value of Equity + Debt - Cash

## The Income Statement

also the statement of financial performance. or **profit and loss** statement

**net income** is the measure of profitability during the period. Also referred to as _earnings_

Earnings show the flow of revenues and expenses generated by the firm's assets.

**gross profit** lists revenues from sales of products - **cost of goods sold**, which includes directly related costs but excludes things like administrative and rnd expenses.

gross profit = total sales - cost of goods sold(COGS)

**operating expenses** are incurred during the regular course of operating the business, and not directly related to costs of goods sold.

**operating income** = gross profit - operating expense(admin, RnD, depreciation and amortization)

**Earnings before Interest and Taxes** includes any other income that are not core to the company's business.

EBIT = operating income + other income

**Pretax and Net income** is EBIT further deducted by interest expense.

**Net income** represents total earnings of the firm's equity holders. It can be used to report the **earnings per share** number.

EPS = Net Income / Shares Outstanding.

## Statement of Cash Flows

The statement of cashflows utilizes the information from the income statement and balance sheet to determine how much cash the firm has generated and have been allocated during a set period.

There are three sections to the cashflow statement. 1. Operating Activities, 2. Investment Activities, and 3. Financing Activities.

### Operating Activity

Starts with the net income from the income statement and adds all non cash entries related to the firms operating activities.

It is generally good to see green in this subtotal as this means the company's operations are profitable.

**adjustments need to be made** based on accounts payable, receivable, and inventory to account for the "credit" nature of these records to find the cash number.

**accounts receivable** increases must be **deducted** as these represent credits to customers that decrease cash in the firm.

**accounts payable** increases must be **added** as these represents credits to the firm and increases cash available.

**Inventory** increases must be **deducted** as it is a cash expense.

### Investment Activity

Lists cash used for investments. Generally **capital expenditures**

It is generally good to see red in this subtotal as this means the company is investing in assets that will produce more profit in the future.

These show the actual cash transactions made by the firm without depreciation expenditures.

### Financing Activity

Shows flow of cash between firm and its investors

It is generally good to see red in this subtotal as this means the company is buying back stock (increasing scarcity of shares you own) and paying dividends while no increasing in borrowing.

## Other Financial Documents

### Statement of Stockholders' Equity

Change in Stockholders' Equity = Retained Earnings + Net Sales of Stock = Net Income - Dividends + Sale of Stock - Repurchases of Stock

### Management Discussion and Analysis

MD&A is a preface to the financial statement where the company's management discusses the past period and future periods. Also **disclosure of off-balance sheet transactions** happens here.

## Financial Statement Analysis For Real

### Profitability Ratios

**Gross Margin** = Gross Profit / Sales(Revenues)

Measures the company's ability to sell a product for more than the cost of producing it.

**Operating Margin** = Operating Income / Sales(Revenue)

**EBIT Margin** = EBIT / Sales (Revenue)

Measures how much a company earns before interest and taxes for each dollar of sales. Is an indicator for the relative efficiency of a firm's operations.

**Net Profit Margin** = Net Income / Sales(Revenue)

Shows fraction of each dollar in revenues that is available to equity holders after the firm pays interest and taxes.

### Liquidity Ratios

**Current Ratio** = Current Assets / Current Liabilities

Shows whether a company has sufficient short term capital to meet its short term obligations.

**Quick Ratio** = Near Cash Assets / Current Liabilities

More stringent than the current ratio.

A high Current or Quick ratio implies that there is less risk in the firm experiencing a cash shortfall.

**Cash Ratio** = Cash / Current Liabilities

Cash Ratio measures a company's liquidity in terms of its ability to pay off liabilities with cash and near cash resources. It is useful for creditors to decide how much to loan to a company. It is an indicator of the firm's value in a worst case scenario.

### Working Capital Ratios

Working Capital ratios look at how efficiently the firm is utilizing its net working capital.

**Accounts Receivable Days** = Accounts Receivable / Average Daily Sales
**Accounts Receivable Days** = (Accounts Receivable / Annual Revenue) x Number of days in reporting year

Indicates how long it takes to collect payment from customers. On an single account level, increases can indicate that a particular customer is having financial issues.

**Accounts Payable Days** = Accounts Payable / Average Daily Cost of Sales

Measures the days it takes to pay a company's suppliers. An increasing number may indicate worse financial situation as it is taking longer for a company to pay its suppliers.

**Inventory Days** = Inventory / Average Daily Cost of Sales

**Inventory Turnover** = Annual Cost of Sales / Inventory

Shows how many times a company has sold and replaced inventory in a given period. Low turnover implies weak sales or excess inventory.

**Accounts Receivable Turnover** = Annual Sales / Accounts Receivable

Number of times a year that a business collects its average accounts receivable. Evaluates a company's ability to efficiently issue credit to its customers. High turnover indicates conservative credit policy and aggressive collections with high quality customers. Low ratio indicates that there is working capital tied up in old accounts.

**Accounts Payable Turnover** = Annual Cost of Sales / Accounts Payable

Indicates how quickly the company is paying its obligation to suppliers.

### Interest Coverage Ratios

Measures a firm's ability to meet its interest obligations.

**Interest Cover Ratio** = EBIT / Interest

5 or better is good. below 1.5 is bad

**EBITDA** = EBIT + Depreciation and Amortization

### Leverage Ratios

**leverage** is the extend that a company relies on debt as a source of financing.

**Debt Equity Ratio** = Total Debt / Total Equity

Measures the degree to which a company is financing its operations through debt versus wholly-owned funds. Reflects the ability of shareholder equity to cover outstanding debts in a downturn.

Better to use market value of the equity as it is a better representation. Has **important** implications for risk and return of its stock.

**Debt to Capital Ratio** = Total Debt / (Total Equity + Total Debt)

Indicates what fraction of the firm is financed by debt

**Net Debt** = Total Debt - Excess Cash & Short Term Investments

Measures whether a firm can pay off its obligations with the cash its holding.

**Debt to Enterprise Value Ratio** = Net Debt / ( Market Value of Equity + Net Debt ) = Net Debt / Enterprise Value

Measures the portion of underlying business activity that is financed by Debt

**Equity Multiplier** = Total Assets / Book Value of Equity

Captures the amplification of the firm's accounting returns that results from leverage.

**Market Value Equity Multiplier** = Enterprise Value / Market Value of Equity

Indicates the amplification of shareholders' financial risk that results from leverage

### Valuation Ratios

**Price-Earnings Ratio** = Market Cap / Net Income = Share Price / EPS

Indicates what multiplier on earnings investors are willing to pay

Used to asses whether a stock is over or under valued based on the idea that the value of a stock should be proportional to the level of earnings it can generate for shareholders.

### Operating Returns

**Return On Equity** = Net Income / Book Value of Equity

Measure of the return that firm has earned on its past investments. High ROE can indicate the company is able to find profitable opportunities.

**Return on Assets** = (Net Income + Interest Expense) / Book Value of Assets

Includes interest expense because assets are funded by both. It is less sensitive to leverage than ROE.

**Return On Invested Capital** = (EBIT (1- Tax Rate)) / (Book Value of Equity + Net Debt)

Measures return on investment after tax profit generated by business itself and compares it to the capital raised and already deployed.

## The DuPont Identity

The DuPont Identity Expresses ROE in terms of 3 Factors.

Dupont ROE = **Net Profit Margin** x **Asset Turnover** x **Equity Multiplier**

Net Profit Margin = Net Income / Sales

Measures overall profitability

Asset Turnover = Sales / Total Assets

Measures how efficient the company is utilizing its assets to generate sales

Equity Multiplier = Total Assets / Book Value of Equity

Indicates Value of assets held per dollar of shareholder equity.

## Other Terms

**convertible bonds** are a form of debt that can be converted to shares.
