# Introduction to Corporate Finance

## Investment and Finance Decisions

Corporations invest in assets that generate income.

Corporations finance their investments by borrowing, retaining and reinvesting cashflow, and by selling additional shares of stock to shareholders.

Investment decision involves **Spending Money**, while financing involves **raising it**

Five Themes

1. corporate finance is all about maximizing value.
2. The opportunity cost for capital sets the standard for investment decisions.
3. A safe dollar is worth more than a risky dollar
4. Smart investment decisions create more value than smart financing decisions
5. good governance matters

Businesses need **real assets** to carry on, which must be paid for.

Businesses pay for assets by selling claims on them and on the cash flow they will generate called **financial assets** or **securities**.

## Investment Decisions

often referred to as **capital budgeting** or **capital expenditure (CAPEX)**.

Today's capital investments generate future cash returns.

The longer a business has to wait for the cash to flow back in, the greater the cash inflow required to justify the investment. Financial managers need to pay attention to the _timing_ of cash inflows, not just their cumulative amount.

## Financing Decisions

A corporation can raise money from lenders or shareholders.

Shareholders are **equity investors** who contribute **equity financing**

The choice between debit and equity financing is called **capital structure**

Corps raise equity financing in two ways.

1. from issuing new shares to investors
2. reinvest cash flow generated by existing assets.

Cashflow that is not reinvested can be paid out as dividends. The decision to pay dividends or repurchase shares is called **payout decision**

## What is a Corporation?

In the eyes of the law, a **corporation** is a _legal person_ that is owned by its shareholders. Corporations pay taxes but cannot vote.

US corporations are formed under state law.

A corporation is owned by its shareholders but is legally distinct from them. Shareholders have **limited liability**. They are not held personally responsible for the corporations debits.

**closely held** companies are those that have a few backers and is not traded publicly.

**public companies** have shares that are traded in public markets.

The separation of ownership and control gives corporations permanence. Managers can be dismissed and replaced and stockholders can sell their shares to new investors. The corporation can survive across many human lifetimes.

## The role of the financial manager

1. raise cash from investors
2. purchase assets to advance the company
3. assets generate cashflows
4. reinvest cashflow
5. return earnings to investors

### Shareholders want to maximize market value

1. Each shareholder wants
   1. to be as rich as possible
   2. to transform that wealth into the most desirable time patter of consumption by borrowing to spend now or investing to spend later.
   3. to manage the risk characteristics of that consumption plan
2. Stockholders do not need financial managers to achieve the best time patter of consumption.
3. Financial managers can only help the firm by increasing their wealth.

Profit maximization is nuanced in that short term profits may damage long term value, long term profits may be increased by cutting dividends but modest returns are not appealing to shareholders.

## The Investment Tradeoff

If a project offers lower returns than what the shareholders can get by investing on their own, then the project is favorable. If the investment offers a lower return, it's in the shareholders interest to take cash dividends to re-invest on their own.

**Hurdle Rate** or **Cost of Capital** is the minimum rate of return a project must hit. It is considered an **opportunity cost of capital** in that it is hedged against other opportunities available in the financial markets.

## Agency problems and corporate governance

Agency problems are conflicts between shareholder and manager's objectives.

**Agency costs** are incurred when managers do not maximize firm value and shareholder's incur costs to monitor and constrain manager's actions
